Bling Bling a.k.a. EXPLOSIONS!
==============================

Now to the step everyone waited for (I guess?): Graphic effects like explosions
([particles](http://craftyjs.com/api/Particles.html)) and animations ([tweening](http://craftyjs.com/api/Tween.html))!

Unfortunately these topics are not exactly simple… so this step starts with
Tweening and the next one will show some particles!

Eeny, tweeny, miny, moe
-----------------------

For now, only the console (and from time to time disappearing enemies) indicate
that the towers are firing and enemies are hit.

When a tower shoots, it should somehow show that. At the same time, it would be
great to see it somehow reloading. As a simple solution, the towers colour
could change: From darkgreen to normal green when the tower is ready to shoot.
When shooting, the tower could flash into yellow and then quickly move back to
half-green. Lets see, how this works.

To change an objects value over time, so called tweening is used. Crafty
luckily offers a [component](http://craftyjs.com/api/Tween.html) for that, so
that the EnterFrame-Count-And-Change game doesn't have to be done on our own.

But it doesn't allow us to animate colours. The documentation states, only the
attributes `x`, `y`, `w`, `h`, `rotation` and `alpha` are supported. Okay, fair
enough: to get a dark green, the alpha value can be set.

Lets start by defining the desired values in `./components/tower.js`:

```js
Crafty.c("Tower", {
  required: "2D, Canvas, Color, Draggable, Delay, Tween",  // added the Tween component

  // …

  init () {
    this.w = 15
    this.h = 15
    this.strength = 1
    this.range = 2
    this.reload_time = 500
    this.alpha_ready = 1.0          // alpha value when ready
    this.alpha_empty = 0.5          // alpha value after shot

    this.color("#00FF00")
    this.alpha = this.alpha_empty   // tower is empty after being built
    this.delay(() => { this.aimAndShoot() }, this.reload_time, -1)
  },

  // …
```

As you can see, the tower will not be loaded from the beginning. This is a
matter of taste but this way is also good for testing the first tweening:

```js
  init () {
    // …
    this.color("#00FF00")
    this.alpha = this.alpha_empty   // tower is empty after being built

    this.tween({alpha: this.alpha_ready}, this.reload_time*0.8, "linear")
    this.delay(() => { this.aimAndShoot() }, this.reload_time, -1)
  },
  // …
```

This changes the colour right after initialising the tower. Good and simple
enough. The animation should be a bit shorter than the actual reload time, to
make sure, it is really finished before the next shot is fired. This also
"feels" better.

Now to the colour change after firing:

```js
  // …
  aimAndShoot () {
    let tower = this

    Crafty("Enemy").each(function(i) {
      const enemy = this
      const distance = Crafty.math.distance(enemy.x, enemy.y, tower.x, tower.y)

      if (distance < tower.range * 20) {
        Crafty.log("Fire!")
        enemy.hit(tower.strength)

        tower.alpha = tower.alpha_empty
        tower.tween({alpha: tower.alpha_ready}, tower.reload_time*0.8, "linear")
      }
    })
  },
  // …
```

Do you see some duplication here, that would fit well in its own little
function? If the answer is yes: Very good! Lets move the tween call into a
separate function called `reload`. This helps when one day, the animation will
be altered and moves knowledge out of the aimAndShoot function – why should it
know how to reload?

```js
  // …
  reload () {
    this.tween({alpha: this.alpha_ready}, this.reload_time*0.8, "linear")
  },
  // …
```

And the two tween calls should be exchanged by `this.reload()` in the init
function and `tower.reload()` in the aimAndShoot function respectively.

Flash! Ahaaa! Savior of the universe!
-------------------------------------

I'm a big fan of Queen but apart from that, the tower should also flash when
shooting. We cannot use tweening for colours, so we might leave this without
animation and use delays instead.

First, we need some more variables, to keep things tidy:

```js
  init () {
    // …
    this.original_color = "#00FF00" // the actual tower colour
    this.flash_color = "#AAFF00"    // the colour while shooting

    this.color(this.original_color)
    // …
  },
```

Now the idea is, to set the flash colour right before shooting and resetting it
right afterwards. Humans comfortably see changes of 50-100ms. Everything
shorter would probably not be visible enough.

The reload function uses 80% of the actual reload time, which is 400ms. So lets
use the left-over time:

```js
  aimAndShoot () {
    let tower = this

    Crafty("Enemy").each(function(i) {
      const enemy = this
      const distance = Crafty.math.distance(enemy.x, enemy.y, tower.x, tower.y)

      if (distance < tower.range * 20) {
        Crafty.log("Fire!")

        tower.color(tower.flash_color)        // Flash! A-aaa!
        enemy.hit(tower.strength)

        tower.delay(() => {
          tower.color(tower.original_color)   // set back to normal colour,
          tower.alpha = tower.alpha_empty     // unloaded state
          tower.reload()                      // and reload
        }, tower.reload_time*0.2, 0)           // after 100ms
      }
    })
  }
```

This looks quite good already. The cherry on the cake would be something like a
projectile moving from tower to enemy. This would delay the actual hit from the
shot, though. Of course, a very quick projectile, that never needs longer than
100ms would not visibly interfere in the time needed to shoot. This wouldn't
work for slow weapons anymore, though. One day, there might be slow rocket
towers and fast laser turrents… who knows?

Projectiles
-----------

A time value is needed, that shows, how fast the towers projectile is:

```js
  init() {
    // …
    this.projectile_speed = 6   // six fields per second?
    // …
  }
```

And the projectile itself is not the tower, but its own entity, as soon as it's
fired. So a new component needs to be created – `./components/projectile.js`:

```js
Crafty.c("Projectile", {
  required: "2D, Canvas, Color, Tween",   // Tween will be used to move the projectile

  events: {
    TweenEnd () {
      this.destroy()                      // remove from scene after reaching the target
    }
  },

  init () {
    this.w = 5
    this.h = 5
    this.speed = 1
    this.color("#FFFF00")   // Hip projectiles wear yellow!
  },

  from (source) {           // projectile starts from here
    this.x = source.x
    this.y = source.y
    this.speed = source.projectile_speed || 1   // speed is not used yet
    return this
  },

  to (target) {
    this.target = target    // target coordinates are hidden in this object
    return this
  },

  fire () {
    this.tween({            // Fly animation simply by tweening x and y coordinates
      x: this.target.x,     // no more arithmetic needed
      y: this.target.y
    }, 100, 0)              // 100ms fixed flight time for now…
    return this // or maybe not, as this is actually fire and forget
  }
})
```

Wohow, a lot happens here but it is still quite readable, isn't it? Still, some
things are not right yet. The projectile actually moves from the upper left
corner of the tower to the upper left corner of the target. Nicer would be a
start from the towers center to the next best corner of the target or at least
its center.

#### shooting from the center

This one is easy. Instead of the plain x,y coordinates of the tower, the center
coordinates can be calculated by adding half of width and height:


```js
  // …
  from (source) {
    this.x = (source.x + source.w / 2.0) - this.w / 2.0  // don't forget the
    this.y = (source.y + source.h / 2.0) - this.h / 2.0  // projectiles size
    this.speed = source.projectile_speed || 1
    return this
  },
  // …
```

#### hitting targets center

Similary easy:

```js
  // …
  to (target) {
    this.target = {
      x: (target.x + target.w / 2.0) - this.w / 2.0,
      y: (target.y + target.h / 2.0) - this.h / 2.0,
      hit: target.hit.bind(target)    // lets save this for later… *wink*
    }

    return this
  },
  // …
```

#### little excerpt on how to hit the corner

To actually hit the corner from the direction of the projectiles starting
point, some math comes handy. For simplicity, just a few links for the
interested reader:

[search for "calculate angle between two points"](https://duckduckgo.com/?q=calculate+angle+between+two+points&t=ffsb&ia=qa)

[search for "move point on angle"](https://duckduckgo.com/?q=move+point+on+angle&t=ffsb&ia=qa&iax=1):

[Great article about Sin & Cos](http://www.helixsoft.nl/articles/circle/sincos.htm)

Some helpers can be found in [Crafty.math.Vector2D](http://craftyjs.com/api/Crafty-math-Vector2D.html)


Up to speed
-----------

The projectile still has a fixed movement time. The Tween cannot help with the
calculation of the flight time. But we know the distance between the points and
can therefor easily calculate it:

```js
  // …
  fire () {
    const distance = Crafty.math.distance(this.x, this.y, this.target.x, this.target.y)
    const time_needed = distance / this.speed * FIELD_SIZE

    this.tween({
      x: this.target.x,
      y: this.target.y
    }, time_needed, 0)
    return this
  }
  // …
```

To make this a tad more realistic, the target should not be hit before the
projectile reaches it.

First, the hit-call should be removed from the tower component (line 41,
probably). Then it can be called on TweenEnd in the Projectile with a strength
value taken from the source (a.k.a. the tower):

```js
  // …

  events: {
    TweenEnd () {
      this.target.hit(this.strength)
      this.destroy()
    }
  },

  // …

  from (source) {
    this.x = (source.x + source.w / 2.0) - this.w / 2.0
    this.y = (source.y + source.h / 2.0) - this.h / 2.0
    this.speed = source.projectile_speed || 1
    this.strength = source.strength || 1
    return this
  },

  // …
```


Conclusion
----------

Finally some movement! The tower shots projectiles now, that move in a specific
speed to hit the target.

The next part speaks about particle effects!
[next part](https://github.com/nkoehring/td_tutorial/tree/03.2_boom_shakalaka).
